mgmt/mcumgr: Changes in mcumgr source code directory structure (#50936)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/services/device_mgmt/smp_transport.rst

.. _mcumgr_smp_transport_specification:

SMP Transport Specification
###########################

The documents specifies information needed for implementing server and client
side SMP transports.

.. _mcumgr_smp_transport_ble:

BLE (Bluetooth Low Energy)
**************************

SMP communication relays on a single GATT characteristic. An SMP command may
be sent in the form of either GATT write command or GATT Write Without Response
command.
SMP responses are sent in the form of a GATT Notification, specifying the same
characteristics as GATT Write command.

BLE (Bluetooth Low Energy) Characteristics
==========================================

MCUmgr Clients need to use following BLE Characteristics, when implementing
SMP client:

- **Service UUID**: `8D53DC1D-1DB7-4CD3-868B-8A527460AA84`
- **Characteristic UUID**: `DA2E7828-FBCE-4E01-AE9E-261174997C48`

The  "SMP" GATT service consists of one **write no-rsp characteristic**
for SMP requests: a single-byte characteristic that
can only accepts write-without-response commands. The contents of
each write command contains an SMP request.

> 

Author: Since I am also working on renaming Kconfig, I do not want to that info no, to just rename them in a few weeks.

SMP responses are sent back in the form of unsolicited notifications
from the same characteristic.

.. _mcumgr_smp_transport_uart:

UART/serial
***********

SMP protocol specification by MCUmgr subsystem of Zephyr uses basic framing
of data to allow multiplexing of UART channel. Although no such transport
exists in Zephyr, it is possible to implement MCUmgr client/server over

> uart transport that does not have framing at all, or uses hardware serial

Reviewer: *UART, and this is incorrect, SMPc defines that there **must** be frames of no more than 127 bytes each, if this can be allowed to be changed then the SMPc documentation needs to be updated

Author: Quite convinced it is 128 bytes:
https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/blob/1cb49a389bcfb0c3e5a6ce72cabb61db11fdd6fa/include/zephyr/mgmt/mcumgr/serial.h#L71

port control, or other means of framing.

Frame fragmenting
=================

> SMP protocol over serial is fragmented into MTU size frames; each

Reviewer: It's defined as over console: https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/blob/main/subsys/mgmt/mcumgr/transport/smp-console.md
Though I would be fine for updating that to have SMP over serial, either as an addition or replacing the existing over console message

Reviewer: Outstanding comment

frame consists of two byte start marker, body and terminating newline
character.

There are four types of types of frames: initial, partial, partial-final
and initial-final; each frame type differs by start marker and/or body
contents.

Frame formats
-------------

Initial frame requires to be followed by optional sequence of partial
frames and finally by partial-final frame.
Body is always Base64 encoded, so the body size, here described as
MTU - 3, is able to actually carry N = (MTU - 3) / 4 * 3 bytes
of raw data.

Body of initial frame is preceded by two byte total packet length,
encoded in big endian, and equals size of raw body plus size of

> two CRC16; this means that actual body size allowed into

Reviewer: -two

initial frame is N - 2.

If body size is smaller than N - 4, than it is possible to carry
entire body with preceding length and following it CRC in single
frame, here called initial-final; for description of initial-final
frame look below.

Initial frame format:

.. table::
    :align: center

    +---------------+---------------+---------------------------+
    | Content       | Size          | Description               |
    +===============+===============+===========================+
    | 0x06 0x09     | 2 bytes       | Frame start marker        |
    +---------------+---------------+---------------------------+

>     | <base64-i>    | no more than  | Base 64 encoded body      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    | <base64-i>    | no more than  | Base64 encoded body       |
```

Reviewer: Not resolved

    |               | MTU - 3 bytes |                           |
    +---------------+---------------+---------------------------+
    | 0x0a          | 1 byte        | Frame termination         |
    +---------------+---------------+---------------------------+

``<base64-i>`` is Base64 encoded body of format:

.. table::
    :align: center

    +---------------+---------------+---------------------------+
    | Content       | Size          | Description               |
    +===============+===============+===========================+

>     | total length  | 2 bytes       | Big endian 16bit value    |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    | total length  | 2 bytes       | Big endian 16-bit value   |
```

Reviewer: Unresolved

.. _mcumgr_smp_transport_specification:

SMP Transport Specification
###########################

The documents specifies information needed for implementing server and client
side SMP transports.

.. _mcumgr_smp_transport_ble:

BLE (Bluetooth Low Energy)
**************************

SMP communication relays on a single GATT characteristic. An SMP command may
be sent by using the GATT Write Without Response command.
SMP responses are sent in the form of a GATT Notification, specifying the same
characteristic as the GATT Write Without Response command.

BLE (Bluetooth Low Energy) Characteristics
==========================================

MCUmgr Clients need to use following BLE Characteristics, when implementing
SMP client:

- **Service UUID**: `8D53DC1D-1DB7-4CD3-868B-8A527460AA84`
- **Characteristic UUID**: `DA2E7828-FBCE-4E01-AE9E-261174997C48`

All SMP communication utilizes a single GATT characteristic.  An SMP request is
sent via a GATT Write Without Response command. An SMP response is sent in the form
of a GATT Notification
Response command. An SMP response is sent in the form of a GATT Notification

> specifying the same characteristic that was written.

Reviewer: One of these needs to go, they're saying the exact same thing

The Write Without Response form is generally preferred, as an application-layer

> response is always sent in the form of a Notification.

Reviewer: Not valid, it is the only method, so this can go

Author: Gone.

.. _mcumgr_smp_transport_specification:

SMP Transport Specification
###########################

The documents specifies information needed for implementing server and client
side SMP transports.

.. _mcumgr_smp_transport_ble:

BLE (Bluetooth Low Energy)
**************************

SMP communication relays on a single GATT characteristic. An SMP command may

> be sent in the form of either GATT Write command or GATT Write Without Response
> command.
> SMP responses are sent in the form of a GATT Notification, specifying the same
> characteristics as GATT Write command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be sent by using the GATT Write Without Response command.
SMP responses are sent in the form of a GATT Notification, specifying the same
characteristic as the GATT Write Without Response command.
```

BLE (Bluetooth Low Energy) Characteristics
==========================================

MCUmgr Clients need to use following BLE Characteristics, when implementing
SMP client:

- **Service UUID**: `8D53DC1D-1DB7-4CD3-868B-8A527460AA84`
- **Characteristic UUID**: `DA2E7828-FBCE-4E01-AE9E-261174997C48`

All SMP communication utilizes a single GATT characteristic.  An SMP request is

> sent in the form of either 1) a GATT Write Command, or 2) a GATT Write Without

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sent via a GATT Write Without Response command. An SMP response is sent in the form
of a GATT Notification
```

Reviewer: And this information is duplicated above already

Response command. An SMP response is sent in the form of a GATT Notification
specifying the same characteristic that was written.

The Write Without Response form is generally preferred, as an application-layer
response is always sent in the form of a Notification. The regular Write form is

> accepted in case the client requires a GATT response to initiate pairing.

Reviewer: It is not

Author: Remove the last line.

If an SMP request or response is too large to fit in a single GATT command, the

> sender fragments it across several commands.  No additional framing is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sender fragments it across several packets.  No additional framing is
```
All of them would be a single command, thus multiple packets for a single command/response

introduced when a request or response is fragmented; the payload is simply

> split among several packets.  Since Bluetooth guarantees ordered delivery of

Reviewer: Note that GATT guarantees delivery order, EATT does not, I'm assuming that EATT does not just replace GATT though and would need to change the whole of how an application works so can be ignored

Author: Changed sentence to `Since GATT`

packets, the SMP header in the first fragment contains sufficient information
for reassembly.

Note: Zephyr currently supports only GATT Write Without Response, and sending

> responses in form of GATT Notifications.

Reviewer: This part can go

.. _mcumgr_smp_transport_uart:

UART/serial and console
***********************

SMP protocol specification by MCUmgr subsystem of Zephyr uses basic framing
of data to allow multiplexing of UART channel. Multiplexing requires
prefixing each frame with two byte marker and terminating it with newline.

> Currently MCUmgr imposes a 128 byte limit on frame size, although there

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently MCUmgr imposes a 127 byte limit on frame size, although there
```

Reviewer: This is wrong then, header is 3 bytes, assuming 128 byte packet, that leaves 125 bytes for data, the data is in base64, 125 / 4 = 31.25, 31.25 * 3 = 93.75 - this is not valid, therefore it allows 93 base64 encoded bytes, 93 base64 bytes is occupies 124 bytes of data, 124 + 3 = 127, so the maximum is 127, not 128.

Reviewer: Unresolved

> are no real protocol contrains that require that limit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are no real protocol constraints that require that limit.
```

The limit includes the prefix and the newline character, so the allowed payload

> size is actually 125 bytes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
size is actually 124 bytes.
```

Author: 128 - 3 = 125:
https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/blob/1cb49a389bcfb0c3e5a6ce72cabb61db11fdd6fa/include/zephyr/mgmt/mcumgr/serial.h#L71

Reviewer: Unresolved, with base64, the amount of data is 124, not 125

> The limit includes the prefix and the newline character, so a size of
> allowed payload is actually 125 bytes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The limit includes the prefix and the newline character, so the allowed payload
size is actually 125 bytes.
```

Although no such transport exists in Zephyr, it is possible to implement
MCUmgr client/server over UART transport that does not have framing at all,
or uses hardware serial port control, or other means of framing.

Frame fragmenting
=================

SMP protocol over serial is fragmented into MTU size frames; each
frame consists of two byte start marker, body and terminating newline
character.
Note: currently the MTU for UART with this fragmenting scheme is

> limited to 128 bytes, and includes start marker and terminating newline.

Reviewer: This information is duplicated from above, can be removed

    | total length  | 2 bytes       | Big endian 16bit value    |
    |               |               | representing total length |
    |               |               | of body + 2 bytes for     |
    |               |               | CRC16; note that size of  |
    |               |               | total length field is not |
    |               |               | added to total length     |
    |               |               | value.                    |
    +---------------+---------------+---------------------------+
    | body          | no more than  | Raw body data fragment    |
    |               | MTU - 5       |                           |
    +---------------+---------------+---------------------------+

Initial-final frame format is similar to initial frame format,
but differs by ``<base64-i>`` definition.

``<base64-i>`` of initial-final frame, is Base64 encoded data taking
form:

.. table::
    :align: center

    +---------------+---------------+---------------------------+
    | Content       | Size          | Description               |
    +===============+===============+===========================+

>     | total length  | 2 bytes       | Big endian 16bit value    |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    | total length  | 2 bytes       | Big endian 16-bit value   |
```

    |               |               | total length field is not |
    |               |               | added to total length     |
    |               |               | value.                    |
    +---------------+---------------+---------------------------+
    | body          | no more than  | Raw body data fragment    |
    |               | MTU - 7       |                           |
    +---------------+---------------+---------------------------+
    | crc16         | 2 bytes       | CRC16 of entire packet    |
    |               |               | body, preceding length    |
    |               |               | not included.             |
    +---------------+---------------+---------------------------+

Partial frame is continuation after previous initial or other partial
frame. Partial frame takes form:

.. table::
    :align: center

    +---------------+---------------+---------------------------+
    | Content       | Size          | Description               |
    +===============+===============+===========================+
    | 0x04 0x14     | 2 bytes       | Frame start marker        |
    +---------------+---------------+---------------------------+

>     | <base64-i>    | no more than  | Base 64 encoded body      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    | <base64-i>    | no more than  | Base64 encoded body       |
```
